---
layout: post
title: "Bruteforcing forks to leak the stack canary [PWN]"
categories: ctf
tags: ikerl pwn stack_canary
date: 2023-04-03 19:00:00 +0100
author: ikerl
---

In 2022, I learned a new technique to leak the stack canary in an interesting challenge developed by [Animanegra](https://underc0de.org/foro/profile/?u=64559). The challenge is called [pwn7](https://bitbucket.org/tlmsec/ctf/src/master/dockers/pwn7/), and Animanegra was very insistent that I tried to solve it. Recently, I found time to solve it (one year later :D) and I decided to publish this write-up to explain this new concept. First of all I have to thank Animanegra for this original and fun challenge.

## pwn7

The program has two parts: the first part, executed by a child created by a fork, asks the user for a number and always prints `Noooope`. The second part, executed by the parent, asks the user if they want to terminate the execution or if they want to enter another number (which creates another fork). 

In addition, it has a function called `win` that prints the flag and the objective of the challenge is to call this function.

The most interesting part of source code is the following:

```c
void bad(){

	char lalala[16]="y";
	int pid;
	char leeme;
	int i;
	int myrand;

	while(strcmp(lalala,"y") == 0){

		myrand=rand();

		pid = fork();

		if(pid == 0){

			printf("In what number I am thinking?(0-1000):\n");
			fflush(stdout);
			i=0;
			leeme=(char)getchar();
			while(leeme != '\n'){
				lalala[i]=leeme;
				leeme=(char)getchar();
				i=i+1;
			}

			printf("Noooope\n");

			return;

		}else{

			lalala[0]='n';

			usleep(100000);

			printf("Do you want to continue (y/n)?\n");
			fflush(stdout);

			gets(lalala);
	
		}

	}

	printf("Program finished\n");

}
```

In this challenge, the vulnerabilities are very obvious. Both the parent's and the child's code have stack buffer overflow vulnerabilities when handling user input. In the parent's part, we have a vulnerable call to `gets` that saves a non-fixed-length string into a buffer that is only 16 bytes long. In the child's part, on the other hand, we have a loop that copies the user's input into a one-byte-sized variable.

The difficulty of this challenge is that it's built with a stack canary memory mitigation, and if we try to exploit these vulnerabilities directly with ROP the attack will be mitigated.

## Bruteforcing forks to leak the stack canary

First of all, it's important to explain at a high level how the `fork` function works. When we call the `fork` function on Linux, a new process will be executed (with a different PID), and it will continue the execution in the same code instruction and with the same memory as its parent. The only difference between both is the value returned by `fork` - the parent will receive the PID of the child, while the child will receive a value of zero. To branch to a different code the program uses this difference.

Since the process memory will be cloned each time a new child is spawned, the child and parent will have the same canary stack. We can use child processes to brute force this value, because triggering `SIGABORT` in a child won't affect the parent.

Once we leak the canary, we can patch it and ROP into the `win` function by doing a ret2win.

The full exploit code is [here](https://gist.github.com/ikerl/ca9aaa94680cb861a5b6bc02d8588b82)

Note that the exploit code is slightly different when used locally or remotely. Locally, we receive the error message of the stack canary validation through stderr, whereas remotely, we receive the `Noooope` string or not, depending on the stack canary's validation result.